---
title: "Contract Theory"
description: "The proper theory of contracts deals with the question of when a given transfer of title to property is legitimate and thus justly enforceable. This theory illuminates the answer to certain pernicious questions such as: can a man sell himself into slavery? Is fractional reserve banking legitimate, or a form of fraud?"
n: 4
date: something
---

> The right of property implies the right to make contracts about that property: to give it away or to exchange titles of ownership for the property of another person. Unfortunately, many libertarians, devoted to the right to make contracts, hold the contract itself to be an absolute, and therefore maintain that any voluntary contract whatever must be legally enforceable in the free society.<sup><a id="fnr.1" class="footref" href="#fn.1" role="doc-backlink">1</a></sup>

This document is part of a course which you can find [here](https://liquidzulu.github.io/libertarian-ethics). I provide the textual version for free to the public to make people aware of the facts contained within and to (hopefully) convince people to purchase the video course. This course is intended primarily as a video experience, and that is where my focus will be in terms of quality, so I do encourage you to check it out if this content is at all interesting to you. The course is sold on a pay-what-you-want model and is copyleft, meaning other people have the right to re-publish it at will. I simply encourage anyone who appreciates the work put into this course to purchase it such that I may make more in the future, and if you do choose to republish any section, please credit me and extend to your audience my request to purchase.


# The Title-Transfer Theory of Contracts

As stated in the opening quote, property theory lies antecedent to contract theory&#x2014;that is, the right to make contracts is implied by the right to own property, and not the other way around. First, recall that property rights are conflict-avoiding norms, the owner is said to be the man who has just possession. But these ownership rights are not set in stone, the owner of a property may abandon it or transfer title to it to someone else&#x2014;consider Crusoe leaving his stick to rot after he has finished spear fishing, if he no longer considers it to be a good which he is acting with, Friday is capable of possessing it without there being any conflict. This is abandonment, where a property is simply ceded back to nature, ripe for someone to homestead it. The latter case, of a man transferring title to someone else is the subject of the theory of contracts. The question of concern is what types of contracts are enforceable and why.

Allow me to first construct the basic case of Crusoe transferring ownership of his stick to Friday. For this to be a transfer and not an abandonment, Crusoe must relinquish possession at the same time that Friday takes up possession, and each man must have the goal of the transfer going forth&#x2014;that is to say, there exists no time between Crusoe and Fridays ownership where the stick was unowned. This means that a third man, Xury, could not come along and quickly swoop in on the property and thereby homestead it. It is clear that Friday now has title to the property.

What makes this transfer an enforceable contract, is that if Crusoe does not physically go through with giving the stick up he has implicitly committed theft&#x2014;the stick belongs to Friday now and Crusoe is using it against Fridays consent. It is therefore those contracts where defaulting would imply aggression that are enforceable. Consider a mere promise, say a woman agrees to marry her boyfriend but does not go through with it&#x2014;she has gone back on her word, but she has not violated the boyfriends rights, therefore mere promises like this are not enforceable. A promise is only enforceable to the extent that it implies a transfer of property titles&#x2014;in such a case the property may be re-possessed by its now-owner.

This theory of contract is called the “title-transfer” theory for this reason&#x2014;to sum up, only those contracts which define the terms of the transfer of title to *alienable* property are legitimate. Furthermore, *conditional* transfers are also legitimate, say that Crusoe agrees to transfer title to the stick to Friday on the condition that Friday performs a dance. Upon Friday meeting the condition set forth by Crusoe, title to the stick is transferred to him&#x2014;this is because the intention was made clear by both Crusoe and Friday that Friday is the just director of the use of the stick upon the condition being met. It will be seen in a later lesson why Crusoe would be &ldquo;estopped&rdquo; from challenging Fridays ownership&#x2014;that is to say, Crusoe could not coherently deny that Friday owns the stick upon the condition being met.

An interesting implication of this theory is that there isn’t really such a thing as “breaching” or “breaking” a contract. If $A$ and $B$ agree that $B$ will transfer to $A$ a sum of &dollar;1000 on the condition that $A$ performs magic at $B$’s birthday party, $A$ has not violated $B$’s rights by not showing up, if $B$ wanted to encourage $A$ to go through with the deal he simply need bake in a penalty clause stating that $A$ transfers to $B$ a sum of &dollar;500 if he does not perform the magic. Still here, $A$ does not “breach” the contract by not showing up, he has simply engaged in an action which the contract covers. The aggression would only be if doesn’t perform and doesn’t hand over the &dollar;500, not because this would breach the terms of the contract, but because this would be a theft of &dollar;500.


# Fraud

Fraud can be defined as the action of deceiving another about the nature of property titles with respect to a given title-transfer. Consider the example where Crusoe has blunted the tip of his spear and that&rsquo;s why he wants to get rid of it, Crusoe lies to Friday and claims that the spear is as sharp as a razor, this is fraud&#x2014;Crusoe has deceived Friday about the nature of the spear. This means that this was not a valid contract, Crusoe did not have the intention of transferring title to a sharp spear to Friday and therefore the contract is null. If Friday had given Crusoe some sea-shells in exchange, Crusoe has implicitly stolen those shells.

A particularly prevalent example of fraud is found in fractional reserve banking; the fractional reserve bank keeps only some fraction of the money deposited and loans out the rest. Consider a full reserve bank; various people come and deposit 100 ounces of gold, and the bank therefore gives these depositors in total certificates for 100 ounces of gold. Here there is a one-to-one correspondence between titles to the gold&#x2013;evidenced by the certificates&#x2013;and actual gold in the vault. Consider what would happen if this bank decided to implement an 80% reserve policy, and they therefore loan out 20 ounces of gold, this would mean that the bank has stolen that gold, because there was already a one-to-one correspondence between property titles in the gold held by depositors and actual gold in the vault&#x2014;therefore the bank is committing fraud in deceiving people into the belief that they actually hold title to that gold. Perhaps instead of physically loaning out the gold they keep all the gold they have, but they give out 20 ounces worth of certificates for gold; this would also be fraud because there would be 120 ounces worth of titles to gold, but only 100 ounces of gold&#x2014;more property titles than actual property implies that people are being deceived about the actual nature of the property in existence, which therefore means there must be fraud.

Often, so-called “free-banking” supporters will hold that the right of people to make whatever contracts they expect to be advantageous means that such fractional reserve banks are not criminal institutions, but as we have seen these people are misunderstanding the nature of property and contracts. It is not the case that one is able to make whatever contract they want so long as everyone agrees to it, property theory lies antecedent to contract theory, therefore a contract which misrepresents the actual nature of property in existence is invalid.


# Voluntary Slavery

With our solid understanding of contract theory, we can analyse the debate surrounding “voluntary slavery” and determine the correct answer. The debate essentially centres around whether a mans self-ownership is alienable or not, that is to say, the question is whether it is legitimate to transfer ownership of oneself to another person. the former view is most notably held by Walter Block, and it can be summed up as follows:<sup><a id="fnr.2" class="footref" href="#fn.2" role="doc-backlink">2</a></sup>

> The underlying point of the libertarian critique is that if I own something, I can sell it (and should be allowed by law to do so). If I can’t sell it, then, and to that extent, I really don’t own it. Take my own liberty as perhaps the paradigm case of the debate over inalienability. The claim is that if I really own my liberty, then I should be free to dispose of it as I please, even if, by so doing, I end up no longer owning it. Clearly, since I cannot own a square circle, I cannot sell it. If I can own my own ability to give true love, then I can sell it; if I logically cannot own this attribute, then, of course, I cannot give, barter, or sell it to anyone else.
> 
> My thesis: No law should be enacted prohibiting or even limiting in any way people’s rights to alienate those things they own. This is “full monte” alienability, or commodification.

So, for a voluntary slavery contract to be legitimate, (1) you must own yourself in the first place and (2) you must be able to sell yourself. Walters contention with other libertarians is that there does not exist objects which are ownable but not sellable&#x2014;the standard example of a contract pertaining to the sale of a square circle is illegitimate because you can&rsquo;t own a square circle in the first place. This would imply that because people own themselves in the first place, they can therefore sell themselves.

A prominent counter-argument to this thesis was forwarded by Rothbard in his Ethics of Liberty:<sup><a id="fnr.3" class="footref" href="#fn.3" role="doc-backlink">3</a></sup>

> The distinction between a man’s alienable labor service and his inalienable will may be further explained; a man can alienate his labor service, but he cannot sell the capitalized future value of that service. In short, he cannot, in nature, sell himself into slavery and have this sale enforced—for this would mean that his future will over his own person was being surrendered in advance. In short, a man can naturally expend his labor currently for someone else’s benefit, but he cannot transfer himself, even if he wished, into another man’s permanent capital good. For he cannot rid himself of his own will, which may change in future years and repudiate the current arrangement. The concept of “voluntary slavery” is indeed a contradictory one, for so long as a laborer remains totally subservient to his master’s will voluntarily, he is not yet a slave since his submission is voluntary; whereas, if he later changed his mind and the master enforced his slavery by violence, the slavery would not then be voluntary.

There are several ways a Blockean might respond to this attack, first they could point to the frontal lobotomy as a procedure which makes a person akin to an animal in terms of thinking. Perhaps there could be a pill or machine invented in the future which would nullify only those parts of a mans brain which are responsible for the ability to be conscious&#x2014;surely a man who underwent a procedure such as these would have indeed&#x2013;potentially permanently&#x2013;subdued his will such that he may be more effectively directed by his enslaver. This would mean that voluntary slavery is not per se illegitimate, but rather is only illegitimate where men cannot figure out how to subdue the slaves will. Furthermore, it is not the will which is relevant to a voluntary slavery contract but the body, so even if it is logically impossible to transfer the will of person $A$ to person $B$, it may *not* be the case that its impossible to transfer the body from $A$ to $B$. After all, both the supporters and rejectors of the right to make slave contracts agree that it is possible to have someone as your slave&#x2014;that is to say its possible for $B$ to possess $A$, the question is whether it&rsquo;s possible for this to be a *just* possession.

And on this note, let us recall the nature of a mans self-ownership. A body is necessarily and objectively linked to an acting man, and it is this link which imbues a man with ownership. Any time you argue with anyone you must assume the primacy of this link and its validity in making the other person own their body. It is the argument from argument, then, which demonstrates the inalienability of the self. That is to say, ownership is just possession, which means *argumentatively justifiable* possession, and the very nature of argumentatively justifying anything implies a mutual recognition of self-ownership, therefore a master cannot justly possess his slave making voluntary slavery a contradiction in terms.

It is not necessarily that surprising either that one cannot sell their body (whilst remaining alive), after all as discussed earlier, the two methods of alienation are title-transfer and abandonment, we already accept that its not possible for an actor to abandon their body, what the above analysis shows is that it&rsquo;s also not possible to alienate your body through title-transfer either. It is a mistake to see property in external objects as being equivalent to property in bodies and then using the fact that you can trade external objects to claim that you can also trade bodies.


# The Last Will and Testament as a Contract

It is possible to alienate some parts or even all of your body though&#x2014;consider Crusoe chopping off his arm. Upon chopping the arm off it is alienable, Crusoe is able to abandon or trade it at will, because he is no longer objectively and undeniably linked to his arm. A similar case exists with respect to ones entire body in the case of death. If Crusoe sets to paper that upon the condition that he dies, ownership of his body is transferred to Friday, then this is a legitimate contract. The instant the condition is met Crusoes body becomes alienable just as surely as a stick or a sea-shell. There could be no remaining objective link between Crusoe and his body at this point because Crusoe has perished&#x2014;he no longer possesses the potential to engage in any form of argumentation, and as such third parties are not in contradiction by claiming to own him. This highlights why a last will and testament is a legitimate contract in general&#x2014;simply set the condition for whatever title-transfers the will defines to be the death of the owner. Should a man die who has no inheritors his property&#x2013;including his body&#x2013;becomes instantly ceded to nature, ready for someone to homestead it. Therefore if a man wishes his corpse be treated in a certain way he must transfer title to it to trusted family or a funeral home. This concept of a last will and testament shall be expanded upon in the next lesson to elucidate a theory of the rights of children.


# Footnotes

<sup><a id="fn.1" href="#fnr.1">1</a></sup> Murray Rothbard, “Property Rights and the Theory of Contracts,” p. 133, in idem. *The Ethics of Liberty*.

<sup><a id="fn.2" href="#fnr.2">2</a></sup> Walter Block (2014), *Toward a Libertarian Theory of Inalienability: A Critique of Rothbard, Barnett, Smith, Kinsella, Gordon, and Epstein*.

<sup><a id="fn.3" href="#fnr.3">3</a></sup> Murray Rothbard, “Interpersonal Relations: Voluntary Exchange,” pp. 40-41, in idem. *The Ethics of Liberty*.
